DOCS-1775: Add how to upload data instructions (#2559)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/data/upload.md

---
title: "Upload Data"
linkTitle: "Upload Data"
description: "Upload data to the Viam app from your local computer or mobile device using the data client API, Viam CLI, or Viam mobile app."
weight: 40
type: "docs"
tags: ["data management", "cloud", "sync"]
image: "/services/icons/data-capture.svg"
imageAlt: "Upload data to the Viam app"
images: ["/services/icons/data-capture.svg"]
# SME: Alexa Greenberg
---

> If you configured [data capture](/data/capture/) on your machine, data is automatically uploaded to the Viam cloud from the directory and at the interval you specified.

Reviewer: Nit: I see what you're going for, but `from the directory and at the interval you specified` comes across a little awkward until resolved at the every end (with qualifier `you specified`). What about a slight clarity tweak:

```suggestion
When you configure [data capture](/data/capture/) on your machine, data is automatically [synced to the Viam cloud](/data/cloud-sync/) from the directory you specified and at the interval you set in the configuration.
```

`If` vs `when` is my preference, absolutely disregard if you disagree!

> However, if you want to upload a batch of data manually from somewhere else either on your machine, or from your personal computer or mobile device, you have several options:

Reviewer: Supernit: think this is the correct form:

```suggestion
However, if you want to upload a batch of data manually from somewhere else, either on your machine or from your personal computer or mobile device, you have several options:
```

Author: Agree there should be a comma after "else," thank you! Methinks a comma could also come after machine, but perhaps that one could go either way. *hmm parrot*

- Run a Python script to upload files from a folder using the data client API `file_upload_from_path` method.
- Run a Golang script calling the data management service `sync` method.
- Upload images from your mobile device using the Viam mobile app.

## Upload data with a Python script

> You can use the Viam Python SDK's data client API [`file_upload_from_path`](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath) method to upload each file you'd like to upload from your computer to the Viam cloud.

Reviewer: Nit: since we can upload multiple files as once as well (dir using your `for` loop approach), maybe:

```suggestion
You can use the Viam Python SDK's data client API [`file_upload_from_path`](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath) method to upload one or more files from your computer to the Viam cloud.
```

1. Install the [Viam Python SDK](https://python.viam.dev/) by running the following command on the computer from which you want to upload data:

   ```sh {class="command-line" data-prompt="$"}
   pip install viam-sdk
   ```

2. Create a Python script file in a directory of your choice and [add code to establish a connection](/build/program/apis/data-client/#establish-a-connection) from your computer to your [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="location" text="location" >}} or individual {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="part" text="machine part" >}}.

> 3. To upload just one file, make a call to the `file_upload_from_path` method according to [the data client API documentation](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath).

Reviewer: Nit: Since step 3 contains itself two alternatives, what do you think of structuring this more like:

> 3. Then, use `file_upload_from_path` to upload your data, depending on whether you are uploading one or multiple files:
>    - To upload just one file ...
>    - To upload all files in a directory ...

Author: Mm yeah good point

> 3. To upload just one file, make a call to the `file_upload_from_path` method according to [the data client API documentation](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath).

Author: ```suggestion
3. Use the `file_upload_from_path` method to upload your data, depending on whether you are uploading one or multiple files:
   - To upload just one file, make a call to `file_upload_from_path` according to [the data client API documentation](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath).
```

>    The following example code could be placed inside the `main()` function (or a function called from `main()`):

Author: ```suggestion
     The following example code could be placed inside the `main()` function (or a function called from `main()`):
```

>    ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
>    await data_client.file_upload_from_path(
>      # The ID of the machine part the file should be associated with
>      part_id="abcdefg-1234-abcd-5678-987654321xyzabc",
>      # Any tags you want to apply to this file
>      tags=["cat", "animals", "brown"],
>      # Path to the file
>      filepath="/Users/Artoo/my_cat_photos/brown-cat-on-a-couch.png"
>    )
>    ```

Author: ```suggestion
     ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
     await data_client.file_upload_from_path(
       # The ID of the machine part the file should be associated with
       part_id="abcdefg-1234-abcd-5678-987654321xyzabc",
       # Any tags you want to apply to this file
       tags=["cat", "animals", "brown"],
       # Path to the file
       filepath="/Users/Artoo/my_cat_photos/brown-cat-on-a-couch.png"
     )
     ```
```

>    To upload all the files in a directory, you can use the same [`file_upload_from_path`](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath) method inside a `for` loop, for example:

Author: ```suggestion
   - To upload all the files in a directory, you can use the same [`file_upload_from_path`](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath) method inside a `for` loop, for example:
```

   ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}

>    import os # Add this package up at the top with your other imports

Reviewer: Supernit: where to add:

```suggestion
   import os # Add this package at the top of your program along with your other imports
```

>    my_data_directory = "/Users/Artoo/my_cat_photos"

Reviewer: Yes! R2D2 is definitely a cat person!

   for file_name in os.listdir(my_data_directory):
     await data_client.file_upload_from_path(
       part_id="abcdefg-1234-abcd-5678-987654321xyzabc",
       tags=["cat", "animals", "brown"],
       filepath=os.path.join(my_data_directory, file_name)
     )

>    ```

Reviewer: Nice job thinking about what the user might actually want to use this for, and building a solution to match! This is great!!

>    ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
>    import os # Add this package up at the top with your other imports
> 
>    my_data_directory = "/Users/Artoo/my_cat_photos"
> 
>    for file_name in os.listdir(my_data_directory):
>      await data_client.file_upload_from_path(
>        part_id="abcdefg-1234-abcd-5678-987654321xyzabc",
>        tags=["cat", "animals", "brown"],
>        filepath=os.path.join(my_data_directory, file_name)
>      )
>    ```

Author: ```suggestion
     ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
     import os # Add this package at the top of your program
                      # with your other imports

     my_data_directory = "/Users/Artoo/my_cat_photos"

     for file_name in os.listdir(my_data_directory):
       await data_client.file_upload_from_path(
         part_id="abcdefg-1234-abcd-5678-987654321xyzabc",
         tags=["cat", "animals", "brown"],
         filepath=os.path.join(my_data_directory, file_name)
       )
     ```
```

4. Save and run your code once.
   Running your code more than once will duplicate the data.
   View your uploaded data in your [**DATA** page in the Viam app](https://app.viam.com/data/view).

> ## Sync data with the `sync` method

Reviewer: Nit: this header should specify Go or Golang, to help differentiate from Python in header above, and help users decide: Oh, I'm Python but want to use `sync` instead of ... oh, `sync` is Go only, I see. 

Opt: Maybe also match header structure to Python? All together maybe something like:

```suggestion
## Upload data using Golang
```

(then maybe `## Upload data using Python` for the first one?)

Author: ```suggestion
## Sync data with a Golang script
```
I deliberately used the words "upload" versus "sync" because they do do different things AFAIK, but you're right they could still be a bit more similar in structure.

The Viam Golang SDK includes a data service API with a [`sync`](/data/#sync) method that syncs all the data from your machine to the cloud.

> The [cloud sync tools](/data/cloud-sync/) sync data automatically according to how you configure cloud sync, but if you prefer to sync programatically, you can instead run a script that calls the `sync` method.

Reviewer: Supernit OPT: tiny clarity addition.

```suggestion
The [cloud sync tools](/data/cloud-sync/) sync data automatically according to how you configure cloud sync, but if you prefer to sync programatically, you can instead run a script that calls the `sync` method directly.
```

Author: Hmm. I wonder if this could be interpreted in less-clarifying ways, like it makes me wonder "oh, does the data service use the `sync` method indirectly? What does this mean?"

Reviewer: Ah, gotcha. Fair point!

The following steps assume you already have a [data capture service configured](/data/capture/#add-the-data-management-service).

> If you want to use the `sync` API method as the only way to sync data, you should toggle sync off in your data service config (`"sync_disabled": true` in raw JSON).

Reviewer: Nit: to reuse the full familiar term. OPT: UI element name in bold, using mode:

```suggestion
If you want to use the `sync` API method as the only way to sync data, you should toggle cloud sync off in your data service configuration (`"sync_disabled": true` in **Raw JSON** mode).
```

1. Install the [Viam Go SDK](https://github.com/viamrobotics/rdk/tree/main/robot/client).

2. Create a Go script file in a directory of your choice.

>    Go to your machine's **Code sample** tab in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and click **Golang**.

Reviewer: Nit: we tend to use `navigate to`, like:

```suggestion
   Navigate to your machine's **Code sample** tab in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com) and click **Golang**.
```

   Copy the code from that tab into your script file to establish a connection from your computer to your machine's instance in the Viam app.

3. Add the required import to the list of imports at the top of your script:

   ```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   import (
     "go.viam.com/rdk/services/datamanager"
   )
   ```

> 4. In your `main()` function (or in a function called from `main`), call [the `sync` method as documented](/data/#sync).

Reviewer: Nit: full task description in link title, 

```suggestion
4. In your `main()` function (or in a function called from `main()`), [call the `sync` method](/data/#sync).
```

Or:

```suggestion
4. In your `main()` function (or in a function called from `main()`), call the [`sync` method](/data/#sync).
```

I feel that `as documented` is readily-inferable from the context, and is explicitly demonstrated in the sample below.

   For example:

   ```go {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   // Get the data management service from your machine
   // Use the name of the data service you configured on your machine in place of "my_data_service"
   data, err := datamanager.FromRobot(robot, "my_data_service")

   // Sync data stored on the machine to the cloud.
   err := data.Sync(context.Background(), nil)
   ```

5. Save, compile, and run your code.
   View your uploaded data in your [**DATA** page in the Viam app](https://app.viam.com/data/view).

## Upload images with the Viam mobile app

Upload images as machine data straight from your phone, skipping the normal data capture and cloud synchronization process, through the [Viam mobile app](/fleet/#the-viam-mobile-app).
This is useful if you want to capture images for training machine learning models on the go.

1. Select **Home** on the mobile app, choose your organization, and select a location and machine.
2. Click the menu button marked "**...**" in the upper right corner.
3. Click **Upload Images**.
4. Select each image you want to upload, and click **Add**.

> With regard to metadata, these images are associated with the machine part you selected, and aren't associated with a component or method.

Reviewer: Nit: tiny clarity.

```suggestion
With regard to metadata, these images are associated with the machine part you selected, and aren't associated with a specific component or method.
```

Q: is `method` correct here? I know of upload data being associated with components, but not sure of method here.

Author: That is a great question. I didn't write this section (just pulled it over from the other page). I know that you configure specific methods in the data capture config on a given component (see "Add method" button in the app) but not sure if that is associated with the data after it's captured... @sguequierre do you know?

       part_id="abcdefg-1234-abcd-5678-987654321xyzabc",
       # Any tags you want to apply to this file
       tags=["cat", "animals", "brown"],
       # Path to the file
       filepath="/Users/Artoo/my_cat_photos/brown-cat-on-a-couch.png"
     )
     ```

   - To upload all the files in a directory, you can use the same [`file_upload_from_path`](/build/program/apis/data-client/#fileuploadfrompath) method inside a `for` loop, for example:

     ```python {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
     import os # Add this package at the top of your program
                      # with your other imports

     my_data_directory = "/Users/Artoo/my_cat_photos"

     for file_name in os.listdir(my_data_directory):
       await data_client.file_upload_from_path(
         part_id="abcdefg-1234-abcd-5678-987654321xyzabc",
         tags=["cat", "animals", "brown"],
         filepath=os.path.join(my_data_directory, file_name)
       )
     ```

4. Save and run your code once.
   Running your code more than once will duplicate the data.
   View your uploaded data in your [**DATA** page in the Viam app](https://app.viam.com/data/view).

> ## Sync data with Golang

Reviewer 2: instruction was to capture how to use sync **to upload files from a folder**. This [sync](https://docs.viam.com/data/cloud-sync/#sync-files-from-another-directory) with an additional files path.
